# EcologicalIntegrity_Guadiana
<b>Estimation of the ecological integrity of the Guadiana River with models </b><br>
 
<b>Authors</b><br>
Sofía Villar Rúa, Carolina Acuña-Alonso, Xana Álvarez <br>

<b>Abstract</b> <br>
Ecological integrity is fundamental to human life and ecosystems, so its assessment and management are crucial. In recent decades, water resources have undergone significant changes due to various factors that have contributed to the physical, chemical and biological pollution of water. To address this problem, a specific model has been developed using the Partial Least Squares Path Modelling methodology to analyse and quantify the main factors affecting the ecological integrity of the Spanish part of the Guadiana River (Spain). The selected contributing variables have been analysed at different sampling points in its basin, analysing the influence of forest cover and anthropogenic pressure on the ecological integrity, composed in turn by water quality and biological integrity. The model predicts 60.3% of the physico-chemical water quality and 56.6% of the biological integrity, showing that ¨Forest cover¨ negatively impacts water quality (W=-0.476) by reducing pollution, while ¨Anthropogenic Pressure¨ positively impacts it (W=0.680) by increasing pollution. Based on the modelling, three future scenarios were designed from the modelling, from the lowest to the highest pressure: a favourable scenario with high riparian forest quality and no reservoirs; an intermediate scenario with good riparian forest quality and no change in the number of reservoirs; and an unfavourable scenario, characterised by very poor riparian forest quality and an increase in the number of reservoirs. In this context, the importance of the conservation and enhancement of riparian vegetation as a nature-based solution is highlighted, as well as the pressure generated by industrial activity and agricultural practices on the ecological integrity of the study area. The favourable scenario, with very good quality riparian vegetation, improves water quality by up to 85%, positively impacting the ecological integrity of the river. In contrast, the unfavourable scenario, with extremely degraded riparian forest, would decrease water quality by up to 62%, negatively affecting ecological integrity. Modelling and future scenarios is an essential tool in the decision-making process to improve environmental governance and water security. In addition, the PLS-PM methodology allows the identification and quantification of relationships between complex variables, providing a solid basis for the design of effective environmental management strategies.   
 
<b>Dataset download</b> <br> Data available at: [OneDrive](https://universidadevigo-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/sofia_villar_uvigo_gal/EV5QgmCV5sNCmEyrzYxEruABl-0idiCidZpY1XGytNYF_w?e=rXyGyI)
 
<b>Link to the paper</b><br>
Not avaialble yet
